RFC 78: Adopt Stimulus (lightweight JS framework) 🎛️ (#78)
wagtail/rfcs: text/000-adopt-stimulus-js.md

- **i18n/l10n** - It should be easy to provide translated / localised content to the elements without additional thought.

### Secondary Goals

- **External reuse** - Is there a pathway toward the components that are built to be used in isolation of styles and in isolation of even Wagtail itself (e.g. as a importable module).
- **ES6 Modules Compatible** - There should be an easy migration path to adoption of ES6 modules this will be out of scope for this RFC but it is good to call out.

### History & Initial Research

Throughout 2022, Wagtail has been releasing a major UI overhaul of the user interface and features in Wagtail’s page editor.

As new UI components have been built, there is an understanding that jQuery is not an option, but React is not suitable for content that needs to be driven mostly by content in Django templates. This has lead to extremely ad-hoc approaches for UI elements, there is almost no consistency between how the new breadcrumbs, tabs and tooltips have been built. This makes it extremely hard for new developers to get started and core developers to maintain frontend code.

> React is an incredible library but better serves situations where the full control of the DOM branch is given to React, DOM rendering is 'given over' to JavaScript and Django templates cannot be leveraged (easily) to change what is inside those DOM elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
React is a powerful library but better serves situations where the full control of the DOM branch is given to React, DOM rendering is 'given over' to JavaScript and Django templates cannot be leveraged (easily) to change what is inside those DOM elements.
```

jQuery has served a great purpose, providing easy DOM traversal and manipulation, however it is becoming a bottleneck for new features and modern DOM APIs are sufficient and jQuery does not solve the problem of making it easy to write consistent code (component state). Additional to this we end up having to a lot of 'initialising' of elements whenever added to the DOM by other means (other JS or maybe async HTML).

This lead us (UI team) to do initial research at the start of 2022 into what frameworks exist (based on suggestions from the Wagtail community). See [Lightweight JavaScript Framework research](https://github.com/lb-/bakerydemo/blob/ui-experiments/lightweight-frontend-framework-investigation-2022.md).

> This also lead to various rounds of feedback about what approaches could work with a leaning towards Stimulus. See the following links:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This also led to various rounds of feedback about what approaches could work with a leaning towards Stimulus. See the following links:
```

- While more advanced usage such as `StreamField` requires someone to learn Telepath and understand JavaScript, this would be at the more complex end of the spectrum (note: Stimulus may offer a way to make the simple cases of StreamField widgets not require this but that is out of scope of this RFC).
- The Wagtail community have been asked to advise whether they want to use Node tooling and the answer is mostly no [Poll about node tooling](https://github.com/wagtail/wagtail/discussions/7739#discussioncomment-2244359). A similar feedback was received on Slack.
- See also this discussion to [allow modifications using only Python/Django](https://github.com/wagtail/wagtail/discussions/8128).
- While community feedback needs to be taken in consideration of the overall project goals it is good to get a sense that many Django/Python devs prefer to work day to day in just Django/Python (which kind of makes sense).

### Why not more React

#### Where React fits

- React is a different paradigm to HTML with JS, instead it reverses the world as JS first and foremost (JSX is just JS under the hood).

> - React is an incredible solution high complexity, large state, components with a high level of interactivity (e.g. Draftail editor) where the inside implementation is meant to be obscured and hard to control by outside intervention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- React is a powerful solution for high complexity, large state, components with a high level of interactivity (e.g. Draftail editor) where the inside implementation is meant to be obscured and hard to control by outside intervention.
```

- React takes over the whole tree it controls, so everything down the tree must also be React which means reimplementing everything in React and non-React. While it is possible to add a DOM element and attach something to it (like a jQuery initialisation) it is not idea.
- It is not practical to output Django server rendered HTML inside a React element, Telepath provides a nice abstraction for data though.
- It is important to have options when building UI in Wagtail, but not too many options, at the moment any new JS only really has the option of go all React or just build whatever you want in JS. This leads to a disconnect between implementations and confusion for new developers.
- Not all developers want to or should have to learn React to contribute to Wagtail, this may be controversial but while React is 'just JavaScript' it is also a bigger learning curve. When building small and simple things (relative to the comments architecture or the dynamic API driven page explorer sub-menu) it should be possible for server side devs to contribute without having to learn too much.

> ### Why Not use Vue, Svelte, Angular, or Solid etc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Why not use Vue, Svelte, Angular, or Solid etc
```

Author: Thanks for this. Changed my title casing half way through writing - almost got them all 😀

All of these frameworks/libraries have larger communities than Stimulus, however they opt the development into a strong direction of using the framework in all code.

Using these frameworks will make it hard to continue to use Django templates, support simple widgets that exist in the Wagtail ecosystem and also mean we need to really decide if React is going to live alongside these others.

### Why Not Alpine.js

> **[Alpine.js](https://alpinejs.dev/)** is quite popular in the Django space, however it is not CSP compatible and promotes even more JS syntax in the DOM which moves us further away from our security goals and vanilla JS usage goals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**[Alpine.js](https://alpinejs.dev/)** is popular in the Django space. However it is not CSP compatible and promotes even more JS syntax in the DOM, which moves us further away from our security goals and vanilla JS usage goals.
```

| [`x-id`](https://alpinejs.dev/directives/id)                                                               | No equivalent                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | N/A       | Each controller has its own scope, even when nested so this is not an issue.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |

> Multiple alpine directives are not included (`x-show`, `x-bind`, `x-text`, `x-html`, `x-model`, `x-modelable`, `x-for`, `x-teleport`) as they more relate to either updating classes, mapping the values to behaviour or more complex rendering of HTML - Stimulus moves all this to the JS controller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiple Alpine directives are not included (`x-show`, `x-bind`, `x-text`, `x-html`, `x-model`, `x-modelable`, `x-for`, `x-teleport`) as they more relate to either updating classes, mapping the values to behaviour or more complex rendering of HTML - Stimulus moves all this to the JS controller.
```

> ### Why not HTMX, Turbolinks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Why not HTMX or Turbolinks
```
